There are six types of questions
you can ask in a data analysis, and
in this lecture, we'll talk about
each of them and what they mean for
interpreting your results.
[MUSIC]
The six types of questions that you can
ask in a data analysis are descriptive,
exploratory, inferential,
predictive, causal, and mechanistic.
Now each one of these questions has
very different characteristics and
imply different ways that you can
interpret findings from any data analysis.
So we're gonna talk about the
characteristics of each of these types of
questions and how they can be used or
misused in any data analysis.
The first type of question you can
ask is a descriptive question.
Now, the fundamental feature of
a descriptive question is that
you're often looking to summarize a
characteristic of a dataset, so often this
involves taking the average or taking the
proportion of some feature in your data.
So for example,
you might ask how many people have visited
this website in the last 24 hours?
Or, you know, what's the average level of
air pollution in the city of Baltimore?
So here, you're summarizing kind
of the features of a dataset and
you're focusing on the data
that you have on hand.
And you're not really worried about things
that are outside of the dataset yet.
You really just want to summarize
the numbers that you have.
The second type of question you can
ask is an exploratory question.
And the basic goal here is
you want to look at trends or
relationships between
variables in your data set.
Sometimes, these are called hypothesis
generating types of analysis because
you're looking at the dataset that
you have in hand and looking for
relationships that might be of interest.
Again, like a descriptive question,
typically with an exploratory question,
you're not interested in things
that are outside the dataset, but
rather in summarizing and characterizing
relationships within a dataset.
The third type of data analysis
question is an inferential question.
And an inferential question can often be
the result of lots of exploratory and
descriptive types of analyses.
And the fundamental property
of an inferential question
is that you wanna make a statement
about something outside the dataset.
And so you often, for example, you wanna
know whether a relationship that you
observe in the dataset
holds somewhere else.
Either in another dataset or a different
population of kind of data points.
And so, the key to an inferential question
is that you wanna make a statement about
something that you don't observe.
And so this is a much more difficult
type of question because now you're
concerned about things that
are outside the dataset.
And so you have to be careful
of what types of methods and
what types of approaches you use there.
The fourth type of question in a data
analysis is a predictive question.
Now with a predictive question you
wanna know whether you can take a set
of features and use them to predict
another feature on a given person or
on a given unit of analysis, right.
So this is at a large scale about
essentially looking at correlations
between lots of features in a data set.
Now, often with predictive
types of questions,
they lead you to solutions that don’t
necessarily tell you how things work or
explain the mechanism of what’s
going on inside any given system.
Because the goal is to really produce
a very good prediction of a given feature,
given a set of other features, and
the goal is not really to
explain how things are working.
Now on occasion, a predictive question can
lead you to an explanation about what's
going on, but the key point here is
that it's not the ultimate goal.
The fifth type of question that we're
interested in is a causal question.
Now with a causal question we're often
looking to determine how average
changes in a set of features or
in a given feature will change
when we modify another feature.
And so, if we take a variable and
deliberately make changes to it,
on average, how will another feature or
another characteristic be affected?
These types of questions can often be
directly addressed via experiment.
Such as randomized controlled trials,
or directly controlled kind
of laboratory experiments.
However, in many other situations,
causal questions can really only be
answered indirectly using observational
data, so in situations where we
can't control what the settings are or
what the experiment or design a specific
experiment to kind of to collect data,
on directly on this question.
And so, there in situations like that,
we need to accumulate evidence through
many different types of studies, and
to develop a pattern that would suggest
that a causal relationship exists.
The sixth type of question that we
are interested in is a mechanistic type of
question.
And the goal here is essentially
to uncover a deterministic link
between two sets of features, okay?
And so we want to know if we can, if we
change one measurement on one hand, can
we, does it always result in a specific
outcome on a different measurement?
Okay?
Now this type of relationship is often
very difficult to identify outside of
highly controlled environments, for
example in engineering processes.
So we're often not, we're not often
gonna be looking at mechanistic types of
questions, but
it is an important area to think about.
Now why are we talking about
these six types of questions?
The reason is because knowing what
type of question you're asking is
really important to interpreting
the results of a data analysis.
It's often very common to mistake
one type of question for another.
And that will often result in
problems in your interpretation.
And on improperly weighting the evidence
from one kind of analysis versus another
kind of analysis.
In fact it's so common to mistake
one type of question for another
that we actually have little nicknames for
when this type mistake occurs.
For example, we often think we're
asking a causal question, but
the way that we've done the analysis or
collected the data is really results
in us asking an inferential question,
and that is the classic correlation does
not imply causation type of problem.
Another good example is when we
think we're doing inferential,
we're asking an inferential
type of question.
But in reality we're doing
something more exploratory and so
that's sometimes called data dredging.
Another mistake that's commonly made is
when we think were trying to do prediction
but we build our prediction
models improperly and
so it ends up being more of
an exploratory type of analysis.
And that's something that's
called over fitting the data.
And lastly, we sometimes think that we're
doing an inferential type of analysis, but
it's really more descriptive, particularly
if you have very small sample sizes.
So, that's sometimes called
an n of one analysis.
So, make sure you know what type
of question you're asking, and
interpret your data
analysis appropriately.